Ruby: document API graphs (#10957)
github/codeql: docs/codeql/codeql-language-guides/using-api-graphs-in-ruby.rst

.. _using-api-graphs-in-ruby:

> Using API graphs in Ruby

Reviewer: Thanks - somehow I overlooked that article 🤦🏻‍♀️

==========================

API graphs are a uniform interface for referring to functions, classes, and methods defined in
external libraries.

About this article
------------------

This article describes how to use API graphs to reference classes and functions defined in library
code. You can use API graphs to conveniently refer to external library functions when defining things like
remote flow sources.

Module and class references
---------------------------

The most common entry point into the API graph will be the point where a toplevel module or class is
accessed. For example, you can access the API graph node corresponding to the ``::Regexp`` class
by using the ``API::getTopLevelMember`` method defined in the ``codeql.ruby.ApiGraphs`` module, as the
following snippet demonstrates.

> .. code-block:: ql

Author: Good point. I think most of the cases are description first, followed by the code snippet. Shall we do it like that consistently, or do you prefer a different format?

> .. code-block:: ql

Reviewer: Description followed by code snippet works for me. Thanks.

> .. code-block:: ql

Author: @felicitymay I think the text is already in description first, followed by a `ql` snippet. I think the confusion with the example you commented on is the use of the phrase `This query` to refer to the example above while show another query right below. That's indeed not great. I changed the text in between the two QL snippets to:

> QL snippet 1
>
> The example above finds references to a top-level class. For nested
modules and classes ....
>
> QL snippet 2

Does that address your concern?

> .. code-block:: ql

Reviewer: Thanks. Your changes make things much clearer 💖

    import codeql.ruby.ApiGraphs

    select API::getTopLevelMember("Regexp")

This query selects the API graph nodes corresponding to references to the ``Regexp`` class. For nested
modules and classes, you can use the ``getMember` method. For example the following query selects
references to the ``Net::HTTP`` class.

.. code-block:: ql

    import codeql.ruby.ApiGraphs

    select API::getTopLevelMember("Net").getMember("HTTP")

> Note that the given module name *must not* contain any ```::`` symbols. Thus, something like
> `API::getTopLevelMember("Net::HTTP")`` will not do what you expect. Instead, this should be decomposed
> into an access of the ``HTTP`` member of the API graph node for ``Net``, as in the example above.

Author: ```suggestion
Note that you should specify module names without ``::`` symbols. If you write ``API::getTopLevelMember("Net::HTTP")``, it will not do what you expect. Instead, you need to decompose this name
into an access of the ``HTTP`` member of the API graph node for ``Net``, as shown in the example above.
```

process, first you need to find instances of the class before you can find the calls
to methods on those instances. The following snippet finds instantiations of the ``Regexp`` class:

.. code-block:: ql

    import codeql.ruby.ApiGraphs

    select API::getTopLevelMember("Regexp").getInstance()

Note that the ``getInstance`` method also includes subclasses. For example if there is a 
``class SpecialRegexp < Regexp`` then ``getInstance`` also finds ``SpecialRegexp.new``.

The following snippet builds on the above to find calls of the ``Regexp#match?`` instance method:

.. code-block:: ql

    import codeql.ruby.ApiGraphs

    select API::getTopLevelMember("Regexp").getInstance().getMethod("match?")

Subclasses
----------

For many libraries, the main mode of usage is to extend one or more library classes. To track this
in the API graph, you can use the ``getASubclass`` method to get the API graph node corresponding to
all the immediate subclasses of this node. To find *all* subclasses, use ``*`` or ``+`` to apply the
method repeatedly, as in ``getASubclass*``.

Note that ``getASubclass`` does not account for any subclassing that takes place in library code

> that has not been extracted. Thus, it may be necessary to account for this in the models you write.

Author: That's much nicer, thanks!

as well as places where data leaves the code base. API graphs provide a convenient way to refer 
to external API components such as library functions and their inputs and outputs. API graph nodes
cannot be used directly in dataflow queries they model entities that are defined externally,
while dataflow nodes correspond to entities defined in the current code base. To brigde this gap
the API node classes provide the ``asSource()`` and ``asSink()`` methods.

The ``asSource()`` method is used to select dataflow nodes where a value from an external source
enters the current code base. A typical example is the return value of a library function such as
``File.read(path)``:

.. code-block:: ql

    import codeql.ruby.ApiGraphs

    select API::getTopLevelMember("File").getMethod("read").getParameter(1).asSource()

The ``asSink()`` method is used to select dataflow nodes where a value leaves the
current code base and flows into an external library. For example the second parameter
of the ``File.write(path, value)`` method.

.. code-block:: ql

    import codeql.ruby.ApiGraphs

    select API::getTopLevelMember("File").getMethod("write").getParameter(1).asSink()

> A more complex example is a call to ``File.open`` with a block argument. This function creates a ```File`` instance
> and passes it to the supplied block. In this case the first parameter of the block is the place where an
> externally created value enters the code base, i.e. the ``|file|`` in the example below:

Reviewer: Fix rst syntax and minor changes:

```suggestion
A more complex example is a call to ``File.open`` with a block argument. This function creates a ``File`` instance
and passes it to the supplied block. In this case, we are interested in the first parameter of the block because this is where an
externally created value enters the code base, that is, the ``|file|`` in the Ruby example below:
```

.. code-block:: ruby

    File.open("/my/file.txt", "w") { |file| file << "Hello world" }

> The following snippet finds parameters of blocks of ``File.open`` method calls:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following snippet of CodeQL finds parameters of blocks of ``File.open`` method calls:
```

.. code-block:: ql

    import codeql.ruby.ApiGraphs

    select API::getTopLevelMember("File").getMethod("open").getBlock().getParameter(0).asSource()

The following example is a dataflow query that that uses API graphs to find cases where data that 

> is read flows into a call to ```File.write``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is read flows into a call to ``File.write``.
```

> .. code-block:: ql

Reviewer: Is there a reason why we used `File.open` above as an example and then use `File.read` here? Could we use `File.read` above so that the example follows through?

Author: `File.read` and `File.write` are simpler functions to read/write files. They were mentioned a little earlier in the text. The `File.open` method is more versatile and complex. I used it as an example to illustrate how to refer to  places where data flows into the parameter of a block (the `|file|` in the example). 

The final large example of a dataflow query is meant to show how API graphs and dataflow fit together in a more or less realistic query. I chose to use `File.read` and `File.write` because these are simpler sources/sinks . 

The `|file|` argument in the `File.open` example is not the file contents but a file handle from/to which we can read/write data. We could extend the example query with that, to make it even more realistic, however, it would also get a bit more complex as we need to track calls to `read` and `write` on the `|file|` parameter to identify additional sources and sinks for the query.

Reviewer: Thanks for explaining. I'm guessing that your target audience will be aware of all of the above.

that you are analyzing. When libraries have predefined subclasses, you will need to explicitly include them in your model.
For example, the ``ActionController::Base`` class has a predefined subclass ``Rails::ApplicationController``. To find
all subclasses of ``ActionController::Base``, you must explicitly include the subclasses of ``Rails::ApplicationController`` as well.

.. code-block:: ql

    import codeql.ruby.ApiGraphs

    API::Node actionController() {
      result =
        [
          API::getTopLevelMember("ActionController").getMember("Base"),
          API::getTopLevelMember("Rails").getMember("ApplicationController")
        ].getASubclass*()
    }

    select actionController()

Using the API graph in dataflow queries
---------------------------------------

Dataflow queries often search for points where data from external sources enters the code base
as well as places where data leaves the code base. API graphs provide a convenient way to refer 
to external API components such as library functions and their inputs and outputs. 
However, you do not use API graph nodes directly in dataflow queries. 

> - API graph nodes model entities that are defined outside your code base.

Reviewer 2: Not technically true, but close enough - especially for the common usage of API-graphs - and it aids in understanding.  
(To be clear, I don't think anything should change here).

- Dataflow nodes model entities defined within the current code base. 

You bridge the gap between the entities outside and inside your code base using 
the API node class methods: ``asSource()`` and ``asSink()``.

The ``asSource()`` method is used to select dataflow nodes where a value from an external source
enters the current code base. A typical example is the return value of a library function such as
``File.read(path)``:

.. code-block:: ql

    import codeql.ruby.ApiGraphs

>     select API::getTopLevelMember("File").getMethod("read").getParameter(1).asSource()

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    select API::getTopLevelMember("File").getMethod("read").getReturn().asSource()
```
Looks like you copy-pasted a bit much from the below example.

Author: Thank you, well spotted!
